Lingvamyxa Parser P0 Instruction: Envelope and Close Rules

Status

This file is an implementation instruction for the first structural parser.
It is not a replacement for Lingvamyxa_spec.txt.

This file describes the generic envelope/tree mechanics only. Profile-level
trailer forms such as `end:`, terminal `return` and `until:` are described in:

    Lingvamyxa_parser_P0_trailer_roles.txt


1. Core Envelope Model

The P0 tree builder treats an opened frame as an envelope:

    FrameEnvelope =
        head
        primary body Structure
        trailer

The primary body Structure is the normal argument/child Structure consumed by
the frame's receiver.

The head and trailer are not ordinary child fields of that primary body. They
control how the frame opens, where its primary body is attached, and how the
frame is closed or completed.

A trailer may be only a marker, or it may be a receiver-like form with its own
argument Structure. The parser must not restrict the size or shape of a trailer
argument Structure. Semantic restrictions belong to the trailer receiver/profile.

Examples:

    print: hello

has:

    head            print
    primary body    (hello)
    trailer         source-level boundary / no vertical continuation

And:

    readLoop:
        readNext: record
        process: record
    until: endOfInput(record)

has:

    head            readLoop
    primary body    (readNext(record), process(record))
    trailer         until(endOfInput(record))

The `until` trailer owns its own argument Structure. That argument may be inline,
vertical or otherwise shaped according to ordinary source Structure rules and
the active trailer profile.


2. Parser Input Events

After source-level normalization, the tree builder consumes generic events:

    ITEM(K, body)
        Ordinary source item at source level K. It may become a frame envelope,
        compact frame, atom/value item, expression Structure or other parser
        item according to the structural and expression scanners.

    DELIM(K, kind)
        Same-level anonymous delimiter / nameless close at source level K.
        kind is canonical-dotted or dash.

    TRAILER(K, spelling, argument_structure)
        A profile-recognized trailer role. The generic parser does not hard-code
        specific spellings here. See Lingvamyxa_parser_P0_trailer_roles.txt.

    EOF
        End of file.

COMMA is handled by the structural item-sequence scanner as a local trailer. It
is not emitted as a receiver-consumable item.

Physical newline is not a short-form trailer. It ends a physical line. The next
source-level event decides whether an open short frame continues with vertical
arguments or is completed by ordinary level rules.

Physical empty lines are ignored as formatting whitespace in P0. They are not
close tokens and do not replace a required same-level delimiter.


3. Core Level Rule

A following source item at a smaller source level is a level delimiter.

    ITEM(M), where M < current open child level
        closes all open Structures above M;
        then the item is parsed at level M.

This is the ordinary way indentation/dots close a vertical tail.

A visible same-level delimiter is needed when the next structural item starts
at the same source level and no smaller-level source line appears between the
two Structures.

Short colon-forms have an implicit argument level. If a short frame opens at
source level K, its argument fields are at level K + 1 even when the first
fields are written inline on the same physical line. Physical newline only
ends the line. If the next source item is at K + 1, it is another argument of
that open short frame. If the next source item is at K or smaller, the short
frame is complete and normal sibling/close rules apply. If the next source
item is deeper than K + 1, it is valid only when the preceding field can own
that deeper level.


4. How Structures Start

A primary body Structure may start in several ways:

    after a head line with inline body:

        print: hello

    after a head line followed by children at source level K + 1:

        if: a
            doSomething

    inside a bounded/compact form:

        print(hello)
        (a b c)
        (a, b, c)

    through a delimiter that opens an anonymous Structure:

        match: value
            ---
                1
                print: World

The delimiter case is important. A DELIM(K) followed by an item at K + 1 opens
an anonymous Structure at K as the next positional child of the current parent
frame.


5. DELIM(K)

A DELIM(K) event is produced by:

    canonical dotted delimiter line at level K
    `---` line at level K

P0 rule:

    if next item is at K + 1:
        close previous anonymous Structure at K if one is open;
        open a new anonymous Structure at K as the next positional child
        of the current parent frame.

    if next item is at K:
        close/cut the current anonymous or implicit section at K;
        the next item starts a sibling or continuation at K.

    if next item is at K - 1:
        close/cut the current anonymous or implicit section at K;
        normal level-delimiter rules close structures above K - 1.

    if next item is lower than K - 1:
        syntax error unless the skipped open tail has already been closed by
        a profile-recognized trailer role or by a profile-permitted nameless
        close.

    if next item is deeper than K + 1:
        syntax error unless the immediately preceding opened item can legally
        own that deeper level.

Anonymous Structures opened by delimiter lines remain anonymous in the parser
tree. Receivers may assign semantic roles by positional signature.


6. Anonymous vs Named Children

Delimiter-created branches are anonymous in the parser tree:

    if: a
    .
    . . doSomething
    .
    . . doOtherThing
    end: if

P0 tree:

    if(
      a,
      anonymous(
        doSomething
      ),
      anonymous(
        doOtherThing
      )
    )

Receiver-normalized semantic view may later treat these positional children as:

    condition -> a
    thenBody  -> first anonymous Structure
    elseBody  -> second anonymous Structure

By contrast, a colon frame such as:

    if: a
    . then:
    . . doSomething
    . else:
    . . doOtherThing
    end: if

builds named child Frames in the parser tree:

    if(
      a,
      then(
        doSomething
      ),
      else(
        doOtherThing
      )
    )

The names `then` and `else` come from the child frame heads. They are not
created by DELIM(K).


7. Generic Trailer Kinds

At the generic envelope level, trailers are described by role shape rather than
by fixed keyword spelling:

    comma trailer
        `,` closes the current open short form at any scan depth. If no short
        form is open at that scan depth, comma is an ordinary separator or
        cosmetic trailing marker. It never adds a field to an open short tail.

    bounded trailer
        `)` closes a bounded/compact form. If a short form is open inside that
        bounded form, that short form is completed as part of closing the
        bounded/compact context.

    source-level trailer
        a following source item at a smaller level closes all open Structures
        above that smaller level.

    nameless delimiter trailer
        `---` or a canonical dotted delimiter may close/cut anonymous or
        implicit sections at its level.

    receiver trailer
        a profile-recognized receiver-like form may close or complete the
        current frame and may carry its own argument Structure.

    EOF trailer
        EOF may close only Structures that the selected profile permits to end
        at EOF.

Specific receiver trailer forms are outside this generic file.


8. P0 Decision Summary

    smaller source level
        level delimiter; closes all open Structures above the smaller level.

    dotted delimiter line
        canonical same-level anonymous delimiter / nameless close.

    ---
        relaxed same-level anonymous delimiter / nameless close;
        may also become a nameless trailer where a profile permits it.

    physical newline
        not a trailer by itself; it ends the physical line. The following
        source level decides continuation or closure of any open short form.

    ,
        trailer for an open short form at any scan depth; otherwise ordinary
        separator or cosmetic trailing marker.

    )
        trailer for a bounded/compact form; completes any open short form
        inside that bounded/compact context as part of closing it.

    profile trailer receiver
        closes/completes an envelope and may carry an unrestricted argument
        Structure.

    empty physical line
        formatting whitespace; not a close token.
