Mixa Manager - the backend seam
Milestone 2 design. Six functions, one headless implementation, no window.

Follows Mixa_Manager_DISTRIBUTION_MODEL.txt section 5. This document fixes the
exact surface before any platform code is written, because the seam is the whole
porting cost: every target reimplements this and nothing else.


1. Why a headless backend comes first

The old model already names it: DummyBackend, "tests, demos, non-desktop and
0.1.2-light targets" (Old_Mixa_Manager_Qt_model.txt section 18).

It is not a stub for convenience. It is what makes the seam TESTABLE. With a
headless backend the whole path - build a TextRect, composite with an overlay,
present, feed input, resize - runs with no window, no font and no platform, and
is verified by comparing bytes. A Win32 or X11 backend then has to satisfy tests
that already exist, rather than being the thing that defines correctness.

It is also the honest order for the distribution model: the base must run where
there is no window at all.


2. The six operations, exactly

Declared in L1 with external: against a hand-written header. Nothing here
returns a platform handle to the caller; the backend owns its own state and is
addressed by an opaque pointer.

    open      (@: MixaBackend backend; size_t cols; size_t rows;
               size_t cell_width; size_t cell_height) int
              creates the surface. Cell geometry in, pixels derived, exactly as
              section 1 of the old model defines them.

    present   (@: MixaBackend backend; @: MixaU8 rgba; size_t bytes) int
              hands over one composited frame. The buffer is borrowed for the
              call and not retained.

    poll      (@: MixaBackend backend; @: MixaEvent out) int
              returns the next pending event or reports empty. Never blocks.
              Delivering a resize event also ADOPTS the new geometry - see
              section 3.

    clipboard_get (@: MixaBackend backend; @: char out; size_t cap) size_t
    clipboard_set (@: MixaBackend backend; const: @(char text)) int
              UTF-8 text both ways. get returns the length NEEDED, excluding the
              terminator, whether or not it fit, and writes out only when it
              fits. Returning the need rather than the count written is what
              separates an empty clipboard (0) from a buffer that was too small
              (result + 1 > cap): both are ordinary, and they call for opposite
              reactions. Carries more weight than its size suggests: it is the
              practical path for entering text a keyboard cannot easily produce,
              which is why full IME integration can be deferred.

    close     (@: MixaBackend backend)

Resize is not a seventh function. It arrives as an event, because that is how
every platform actually delivers it.

open takes an already-allocated MixaBackend and the caller must zero it before
the first open. open refuses a backend that is already open, but it cannot tell
a never-opened one from uninitialised memory. Sizing the struct needs the
concrete backend's own header, which is where the opaque type is completed -
so a program links exactly one backend and includes that backend's header.


3. The event

One shape for every kind, so the seam does not grow a variant per platform.

    MixaEvent
        kind        none / key / mouse / resize / close
        codepoint   Unicode scalar for a key event, 0 otherwise
        keycode     non-text key identity; see below
        modifiers   bit set: shift, ctrl, alt, meta
        row, col    cell coordinates for mouse events
        buttons     bit set for mouse events
        cols, rows  new geometry for resize events

Two deliberate decisions.

Keys arrive as a CODEPOINT plus a separate KEYCODE, not as one merged token.
Text input is a codepoint; F5, Home and the arrows are not text and have no
codepoint. Merging them forces every platform to invent private values for the
non-text keys, which is the private protocol the old model's section 0.2 warns
against. Section 9 of that model is exactly this problem.

Mouse arrives in CELL coordinates, not pixels. The backend knows the cell
geometry from open, so it converts once; otherwise every consumer repeats the
division and they drift.

A resize event is ADOPTED as it is delivered, not merely reported. This is the
half that makes "resize is not a seventh function" actually true. Without it the
event is inert: the frame keeps its old dimensions, so present goes on
validating against the old byte count and silently refuses a correctly sized
new frame, or copies only a prefix of a larger one. So poll re-derives the frame
from the event's cols/rows and the cell size fixed at open, and present agrees
with the event from that call onward. Contents after an adoption are undefined -
composite and present a whole frame.

Adoption reuses open's overflow guards; a resize that would overflow is refused
exactly as open refuses it. When adoption fails, poll returns non-zero, still
writes the event to out, and leaves the old surface intact - a caller that
ignores the result keeps a working surface at the old size rather than a
half-resized one.

By the time a real platform hands you a resize event its surface has already
changed, so adopting on delivery is not a headless convenience; it is the
behaviour a Win32 or X11 backend has to reproduce anyway.


4. What the headless backend does

    open       allocates a frame buffer of the derived pixel size
    present    copies the frame into it and counts the call
    poll       returns events from a queue the test fills directly, and
               adopts the new geometry when it delivers a resize
    clipboard  an in-memory string
    close      frees

Plus two functions that exist only in the headless build, for tests:

    push_event   append a synthetic event to the queue
    frame_at     read a pixel of the last presented frame

Those two are the reason this milestone is checkable at all. They are not part
of the seam and no real backend implements them.


5. Test plan

  seam
    open with zero cols or rows refused; overflow refused
    present with a buffer smaller than the frame refused, nothing copied
    present twice: the second frame replaces the first, not blended
    poll on an empty queue reports empty rather than returning a stale event
    close then use refused rather than crashing - every entry point, poll
      included

  path, end to end and byte-exact
    build a TextRect, put text, composite with a cleared overlay, present,
      and read back the pixels that the compositor's own selftest already
      pins - so the two agree rather than each being self-consistent
    an opaque overlay covers the text underneath, verified through present

  resize
    a resize event changes the geometry a consumer reads
    after that event, present accepts a frame of the NEW size
    cover BOTH directions, because the assertion that catches an inert resize
      is not the same one in each:
        after a GROW, present refuses a frame of the OLD size. The old size is
          smaller than the new frame, so the minimum-size check rejects it.
        after a SHRINK, "refuses OLD" proves nothing. The old size is LARGER
          than the new frame, and present only requires at least a whole frame,
          so it accepts either way. There the decisive assertion is that
          present accepts the NEW size - an inert resize would refuse it as too
          small for the geometry it still believed in.
    frame_at addresses the new extent, and refuses coordinates outside it
    a resize whose derived size overflows is refused, poll reports the
      failure, and the old surface still works

  input
    a text key arrives with a codepoint and no keycode
    a non-text key arrives with a keycode and codepoint zero
    modifiers survive both
    a mouse event lands on the cell containing the pixel, and the pixel one
      column to the right lands on the next cell

  clipboard
    set then get round-trips UTF-8 unchanged, including a multi-byte character
    get into a buffer that is too small returns the needed length and leaves
      the buffer untouched
    an empty clipboard returns 0, and is therefore distinguishable from the
      too-small case above


6. What this milestone does NOT do

No Win32, no X11, no Cocoa. No font: present takes pixels, and what draws
glyphs into them is the compositor, which still uses the placeholder from
milestone 1. No IME. No message pump: poll never blocks, and this milestone
calls it in a straight line rather than from a turn loop.

A real backend is the next milestone and inherits these tests unchanged. If a
platform cannot satisfy one of them, that is a finding about the seam, and the
seam changes here rather than the platform being special-cased.


7. Who owns the loop

This was written down as an open question for the first real backend. It is not
open; the language already answers it, and the answer is why poll must not
block.

Lingvamyxa_spec.txt section 19.29.6: a running Message IS an L3 Thread. It owns
one arena, a FIFO inbox and outbox, and one serial execution lane, and no more
than one of its turns runs at a time. Whether turns run on a dedicated OS
thread, an actor in a pool or a cooperative host loop is explicitly an
implementation choice, section 19.28.

So the loop is not something a backend introduces. Any Mix Manager that is not a
one-shot utility exchanges LMX Messages, and a message exchange has a turn loop
by construction. The backend is an EVENT SOURCE feeding that loop's inbox, and
poll is the drain. A blocking poll would put the wait inside the event source,
where it would own scheduling it has no business owning - it would have to
decide how long to wait on behalf of a Message whose other work it cannot see.

What we do today is what the spec already describes for the bootstrap: "the
current hosted standalone bootstrap begins as one root Message and runs its
external process entry in that Message's turn loop", and it names parser, trans,
make, finalize and buildCore as exactly that. L3 Thread is not implemented yet,
so Mix Manager runs as if inside one Message, one turn.

7.1. The groundwork to lay now

Cheap now, expensive to retrofit, so it goes in before the first real backend:

    drain, do not consume. The loop drains poll into a FIFO inbox and then
      runs a turn over that inbox, rather than acting on each event where it
      is polled. When L3 Thread lands, the inbox becomes the Message's inbox
      and the backend does not change at all - only its consumer does.
    one turn, no scheduler. Do not build scheduling, priorities or fairness.
      One root Message, one lane, turns taken in FIFO order, exactly as
      19.29.6 fixes it.
    stage the outbox even though nothing reads it, so that outbound work is
      already expressed as staged messages rather than as direct calls.

7.2. Still open: how the loop idles

A cooperative loop that never blocks burns a core. Resolving that is a
SCHEDULER question under 19.28, not a seam question - which is the useful part
of the distinction, because it means the six operations do not grow a seventh
for it. Two shapes look plausible and neither needs deciding until a real
backend exists: the backend exposes a waitable handle the scheduler waits on
along with its other sources, or the scheduler owns the platform wait outright
and the backend stays purely a drain. Do not add a blocking wait to the seam to
paper over this.


8. What the first real backend found

Section 6 said a real backend inherits these tests unchanged, and that a
platform which cannot satisfy one is evidence about the seam rather than a
special case. Win32 is the first implementation able to test that claim - with
one implementation it was unfalsifiable - so what it found is recorded here.

THE SEAM DID NOT CHANGE. All six operations are implementable on Win32 as
specified: open sizes the CLIENT area, present swizzles RGBA into a BGRA DIB and
blits, poll drains with PeekMessage, clipboard goes through CF_UNICODETEXT, and
close tears down. No seventh operation was needed and none of the six was found
wrong.

8.1. poll and the message pump

PeekMessage with PM_REMOVE is the drain, and it fits: poll returns one event or
NONE and never waits, exactly as section 7 requires.

7.2 is not closed by this, and Win32 sharpens it. A cooperative caller spinning
on an empty queue burns a core here just as it does headless, and Win32's
natural idle - MsgWaitForMultipleObjects, or a blocking GetMessage - is
precisely what the seam refuses to expose. A platform can feed the drain but
cannot honestly solve idling inside the six operations. Still a scheduler
question under 19.28. Do not add a blocking wait to the seam for it.

8.2. Two guarantees a real platform cannot be made to assert

Not seam mismatches. Limits on what a platform's own message surface can
express, worth knowing before a green Win32 run is read as covering more than
it does.

  resize overflow. WM_SIZE packs the client size into a 16-bit LOWORD and
    HIWORD, so a size_t-overflowing geometry cannot be injected at all - not by
    PostMessage and not by a real resize. Headless can push cols = SIZE_MAX/4+1
    and headless therefore still must. Win32 substitutes a 1x1 client yielding
    zero cells, which exercises the same failure path: adoption fails, the event
    is still delivered, the old surface survives.

  key modifiers. GetKeyState does not reflect messages delivered by
    PostMessage, so a synthetic WM_CHAR carries no Shift or Ctrl. Mouse
    modifiers arrive in wParam as MK_ bits and ARE assertable. The Win32 suite
    pins mouse modifiers and does not claim keyboard ones; real input reports
    them.

8.3. present is the one operation this style of test cannot fully check

frame_at reads the backing store, so the suite verifies what present COPIED,
not what it displayed. On Win32 the copy and the blit are separate steps and
only the first is observable this way; the suite also runs with the window
hidden so it stays unattended, which means there is nothing on screen to observe
even in principle.

Checking the blit call's own result closes the API-failure half and is worth
doing. The other half - that a human would have seen it - is not assertable in
an unattended suite, and no test design changes that. Treat present as covered
for its copy semantics and manually verified for its display.


9. Glyphs: the rendering doctrine, and what it does to the seam

THE DOCTRINE ITSELF NOW LIVES IN Mixa_Manager_RENDERING_DOCTRINE.txt, because it
governs the whole application and not merely this seam - image zoom, DPI and any
future scaling path are bound by it too, and whoever writes those will not be
reading a document about backends. What follows here is its consequence for the
six operations.

Note the scope stated there: the rule fixes integer POSITIONS AND VALUES. It
does not require the RATIO between the two grids to be a whole number - I
invented that requirement and it is not part of the doctrine.

Fixed by the language owner on 2026-09-09, in response to the observation that
most text windows today look wrong. The cause is not incompetence; it is
accepting the default behaviour of standard scaling machinery. So this is stated
as a prohibition, not a preference.

9.1. The doctrine

    Compute fractionally, then SNAP. Sizes and spacings are worked out in
      fractional arithmetic, then reduced to integer positions and integer
      values, and every text thing is drawn at those integers.

    NEVER RESIZE THE FONT. Take the glyph at whatever native pixel size the
      system gives, and use it pixel for pixel. No scaling, no blur, no
      sub-pixel positioning, no fractional resize.

    If only one size is available, use it. A larger window does not mean larger
      letters - it means MORE letters.

    Resize is lazy and discrete.

9.2. The seam consequence: open's contract inverts

open currently takes cell_width and cell_height from the caller, so the caller
dictates the cell and the backend must fit the font to it. Under 9.1 that is
backwards: if the font may not be scaled, the cell size is a CONSEQUENCE of the
font's native metrics, not an input.

So the flow becomes: ask the backend what cell the available font actually
gives, then derive cols and rows from the window size. The caller chooses how
many cells fit; it does not choose how big a cell is.

Resize needs no change and already obeys 9.1: a resize event carries cols and
rows while the cell size stays fixed from open, which is exactly "a bigger
window shows more letters". That was already implemented and tested in both
directions before this section existed.

9.3. Why glyph rasterization belongs behind the seam

Section 14 of the old model requires font fallback, wide characters, combining
marks, ambiguous width and box drawing. A small embedded bitmap font fails all
of them, so embedding one is the wrong instinct - the system rasterizer supplies
this for free and is the whole reason not to ship our own.

But present takes finished RGBA, so the six operations have no way to obtain a
glyph. Three shapes were considered:

  the compositor rasterizes    needs font data of our own - rejected by 9.3
  the backend draws text       the seam grows "draw a string" and the
                               application loses cell-exact layout - rejected,
                               it hands the platform the one thing 9.1 exists
                               to protect
  the backend rasterizes ONE   the platform returns an alpha bitmap for a
  GLYPH                        codepoint at its native size; the application
                               places it. Layout stays with the application,
                               present is untouched

The third is adopted. It is a SEVENTH operation, after this document twice
refused one - and that is the correct outcome rather than an embarrassment:
section 6 says a platform requirement the six cannot meet is evidence about the
seam, and the seam changes here rather than the platform being special-cased.
The two earlier refusals stand, because both were about moving the WAIT or the
LOOP into the seam. This moves neither.

9.4. The shape, exactly

open's cell size becomes IN/OUT rather than gaining a second query operation:

    open (backend; cols; rows; size_t *cell_width; size_t *cell_height)

The caller passes what it would like; the backend writes back what it actually
has. A backend WITH a font overwrites the request with its font's native
metrics, because 9.1 forbids scaling to fit a request. A backend WITHOUT a font
- headless - honours the request exactly, which is what keeps it usable as a
fixture with no font on the machine.

This is deliberate: it makes ignoring the answer awkward. A caller that passes
its wish and never reads back is the exact mistake that produces stretched text.

Then one genuinely new operation:

    glyph (backend; codepoint; MixaGlyph *out)

returning an 8-bit alpha coverage bitmap at the font's NATIVE size, plus the
bitmap's width and height and the bearing needed to place it in the cell. Never
scaled, per 9.1. The application blends it into TextRect at integer positions.

Advance width is reported so the application can detect a WIDE character - two
cells - which section 14 of the old model requires. The application decides what
to do about it; the backend only reports.

A codepoint the platform cannot render must be reported as missing rather than
silently substituted, so font fallback stays a decision of the application
rather than a surprise from the platform.


10. Both layers are cellular, and one drawer serves both

Revised by the language owner on 2026-09-09, after section 9. This supersedes
the old model's description of OverlayRect as a transparent raster/vector
rectangle.

10.1. What changes

The upper layer is a CELL GRID, not a raster. Two cell grids share the same
pixel extent, and each has a ROLE - the transparency is functional, not
decorative:

    text layer     small cells, as close as a full-screen console would give.
                   This is the CONSOLE: input on the bottom line, output
                   scrolling upward above it, Norton-style.
    upper layer    a larger monospace font, roughly 1.5x, drawn
                   SEMI-TRANSPARENTLY over the text layer. This is the PANELS
                   AND MENUS, and it is transparent so that the console output
                   underneath stays readable while a panel covers it.

ClearShell is arranged differently - its text input sits at the top and what
lies beneath is the camera image rather than the console - which is worth
knowing when reading it as a reference, because the transparency there is doing
a different job.

Both are strictly monospace. Both are drawn by ONE pseudographics drawer through
one API - the drawer does not know which layer it is drawing, and believes it is
drawing pseudographics in both cases.

10.2. What this rules out, deliberately

There are NO graphical elements in the interface. Not "few" - none. Anything
that looks like a frame, a panel, a divider or a control is pseudographics in a
cell.

Images are not an exception to this; they are a future THIRD layer, a plain
buffer blitted into a window prepared in advance. That is not built and is not
designed here. The point of naming it is to keep it OUT of the drawer: the
moment the drawer grows a "draw a picture" call, the single-API property is
gone and the two layers stop being interchangeable to it.

10.3. Choosing the upper font: the available size NEAREST to 1.5x

Decided by the language owner on 2026-09-09:

    the upper layer wants roughly 1.5x the text cell, so take the AVAILABLE
    system size nearest to that, and use it as it comes.

8x16 might pair with 11x22, a factor of 1.375. That is the finished answer. The
discreteness the doctrine asks for is that the size is a REAL one the system
offers rather than one we computed - not that any ratio comes out whole.

So the two grids do NOT generally align, and upper cell boundaries will fall
inside text cells rather than on their edges. Accepted deliberately. Forcing
alignment would mean either scaling a font, which is forbidden, or rejecting
sizes closer to what is wanted in exchange for a property we do not need.

Recorded plainly because this section was twice wrong before it was right, and
both times the error was mine rather than a change of direction: I generalised
"integer positions and values" into "integer ratios", then offered the language
owner a choice between two readings of my own invention, then wrote the answer
up as "nearest integer multiple". The doctrine never asked for any of that. If
this section looks over-explained, that is why.

10.4. Seam consequence

open must report the metrics of BOTH layers, not one cell size, and it must
report them rather than accept them - section 9.2. A backend that has only one
font reports the same metrics twice; that is a legitimate answer, not a failure.

This is why open's out-parameter is a STRUCT rather than two size_t pointers:
the third layer in 10.2 is explicitly anticipated, and a struct grows without
breaking the signature again.


11. Choosing a backend AT RUNTIME, not at link time

Required by the language owner: an arrangement that can be swapped in SETTINGS.

11.0. What this is NOT for, since I got that wrong first

I justified this as "not being bound to Win32". That is not a justification, and
the language owner said so: we build binaries per OS by rebuilding, which is how
cross-platform software works. A Windows binary carries the Win32 backend and a
Linux one carries X11, and swapping those at runtime is meaningless because the
other platform's code is not there.

The real case is SEVERAL BACKENDS ON THE SAME OS:

    Linux      X11 or WAYLAND - a live choice today, not a future one
    Windows    GDI, which is what we have, or Direct2D later
    anywhere   headless ALONGSIDE the real one, so a shipping binary can be
               driven headlessly in a test rather than needing a separate build

Plus falling back when a backend cannot start - no display available - which
today would be a crash rather than a fallback.

The honest weight: the argument for doing it NOW is that retrofitting means
touching every call site and there are few of them yet. That is an argument
about timing, not about necessity, and it is weaker than I first presented it.

11.1. Where we actually stand

Checked rather than assumed. The seam HOLDS: nothing Win32-specific -
windows.h, HWND, HDC, WM_ - appears anywhere outside mixa_backend_win32. The
pump calls mixa_backend_poll and the glyph compositor calls mixa_backend_glyph,
and neither knows what is behind them.

So the code is not bound to Win32. The BUILD is. A translation unit picks its
backend with a predef line, and both backends define the SAME SYMBOL NAMES -
mixa_backend_open and the rest - so the two cannot even be linked into one
binary. Swapping means rebuilding, which is not a setting.

11.2. The change: a dispatch table

The operations keep their shape. What changes is how a consumer reaches them:

    a struct of function pointers, one field per operation
    each backend exports a constructor returning ITS table, under a name of its
      own - mixa_backend_win32_table, mixa_backend_headless_table
    the application selects a table at startup and passes it where it now
      passes a backend

Then both backends link into one binary, and which one runs is a decision rather
than a build. The seam's operation list, its contracts and its tests are all
unchanged - this is about dispatch, not about what is dispatched.

11.3. Cost, stated honestly

One indirection per call. present is once a frame, poll is once an event, and
glyph is cached - so it is not a rendering cost. The real cost is that a table
can be null or half-filled where a link error used to be impossible, so
constructing one must be all-or-nothing and validated once at selection.

11.4. Do it now, and what it buys later

Now, because the call sites are few and retrofitting means touching every one of
them. Later it is also the prerequisite for the distribution model's shape,
where backends are EXTENSIONS to be installed rather than built in: dynamic
loading needs a table to fill, so this is the half of that work which is cheap
today.

Dynamic loading is NOT part of this. A table selected from a fixed set is enough
to satisfy "swappable in settings", and loading code from disk is a decision
with its own consequences.
