Mixa Manager - rules for writing the L1 in this subtree
Short, and each one earned rather than assumed.


0. Why L1 and not C, since L1 is awkward and C is not

Written down because the awkwardness is real, the temptation is obvious, and
someone has already given in to it: 620 lines of the selection model arrived as
C inside a header, with a five-line .lm1 wrapper.

L1 is a TEMPORARY AUXILIARY TOOL that becomes a PERMANENT INTERMEDIATE LINK. It
looks strange because it is a thin, syntax-directed lowering to C - an
intermediate representation, not a language designed to be pleasant to write.
Today we author in it because L2 and L3 do not exist yet; later they will, and
they will translate DOWN THROUGH L1 into C.

That is the whole argument, and it is not about purity:

    L2 translates to L1, not to C.

So L1 written today already sits where the chain passes. When it is rewritten
in L2 it lowers to the same L1, and nothing is thrown away. C written today sits
BESIDE the chain: it has to be rewritten to get onto it, and until it is, the
part of the program written in C is the part the language cannot see, optimise
or reason about - including the const and immutable optimisations section 1 is
about.

So the awkwardness is not a reason to escape into C. It is the shape of the
thing we are standing on. If L1 genuinely cannot express something, that is a
finding worth reporting - it is how L1 gets fixed, and several have been fixed
that way already. Writing C instead reports nothing and fixes nothing.

0.1. This subtree is not just an application

Worth knowing before deciding that a shortcut is harmless.

mixa_manager is the first substantial body of REAL APPLICATION CODE written in
L1. Everything before it was the translator writing itself, which exercises a
narrow and self-selected slice of the language: l1trans only needs what l1trans
happens to use.

So this subtree is where we find out what L2 must actually provide. The L2
translator is being built RIGHT NOW, in parallel, by other people - and what we
write here is what it will have to translate when L1 is rewritten into L2 and
L3 blocks are lifted out of it. At L3 the language may be interpreted outright,
which constrains further what has to lower cleanly.

That gives every awkward moment a second value. A place where L1 makes something
hard is not lost time: it is a REQUIREMENT DISCOVERED, found by real use rather
than guessed at in a specification. Report it and it becomes an input to the
translator being written this week.

Which sharpens the objection to C past "it is off the chain": C teaches the L2
translator NOTHING. It produces no requirement, no evidence, no pressure on the
design. It is invisible to the very effort this code exists to inform.


1. const on everything that only reads

Put const: on every pointer parameter the function does not modify. Maximally,
not selectively.

This is NOT style here. Lingvamyxa_spec makes const load-bearing: a const
reference is what lets the runtime work WITHOUT going through the node holding
the void * pointers, which is one of the two optimisations the language owner
asked to be preserved from the start. Writing const now is not tidiness ahead of
a compiler that will use it - it is recording, while the author still knows, the
fact the optimisation will need.

immutable is being added to L1 by Codex in a free semantic form. Availability is
TOOL-VERSION-SPECIFIC and that distinction matters here: the root implementation
is published, but the STG default translator - the one this subtree builds with -
has not been promoted to it yet. So it exists, and we cannot use it. Do not
invent a spelling in the meantime; a second one would have to be unpicked.

1.1. Use the PARENTHESISED form

    const: @(MixaEvent ev)          use this
    const: @: MixaEvent ev          refused, with a diagnostic

The current translator refuses the second form when more fields follow, and the
diagnostic tells you the fix:

    qualifier parameter has extra fields; write `const: @(type name)` or place
    the qualifier last

So the paren form is the spelling to use, and nothing silently breaks if you
forget - the build stops and tells you.

An earlier version of this section said the non-paren form SILENTLY LOSES THE
REST OF THE PARAMETER LIST. That WAS true once and is not now: L1_spec section 5
records both parameter defects as fixed in c8ceb67, and the fix was exactly this
diagnostic rather than a wider parse. I had read that sentence the same day and
still carried the vivid description of the defect forward instead of the line
saying it was repaired. Verified by probe on the current translator before
correcting.

Keep checking parameter counts in the generated C after a wide const change -
but as ordinary care, not because something is lying to you.

2. Never edit .lm1 through a tool that processes backslashes

`\` is the field-follow operator, and layered escaping eats it silently: `\type`
has become a TAB and `\b` a backspace byte, with nothing reported. Use a quoted
heredoc, or an anchored edit. After any bulk change, grep for a literal tab and
for the backspace byte.


3. No valued or dot member access

Banned project-wide. The only door is the explicit C one, `c.value.field`.


4. What verifies a change here

run_mixa.ps1, and that is all. Do NOT run stg/l1_baseline/gate.ps1 for
mixa_manager work: it rebuilds the shared translator, which cannot be affected
by anything in this subtree, and doing so has already collided with someone
else's integration. The gate is for L1.


5. What writing the selection model in L1 actually cost

Kept because this subtree is where L2's requirements are found, and because the
evidence is worthless if it is not written down while it is fresh.

CLASSIFIED RATHER THAN LISTED, at Codex's insistence and he is right: I sent
these as one list and they are three different kinds of thing. "We needed a
linear scan here" is not "L2 must provide a hash map", and a manual L1
allocation pattern is not the L2 storage model. Conflating them turns an
observation into an unearned mandate.

5.1. Library convenience - wants a library, not a language change

    no strdup, no strrchr surface; the parent path is cut by scanning for '/'
    growable arrays are hand-rolled each time

These are answered by an L1 library unit, the way mixa_event_fifo.lm1 already
answers one. Nothing about the language needs to change.

5.2. L1 limitations - real, and expected of an intermediate representation

    no map or set, so linear scans with manual shift-compaction
    no valued or dot access, so struct shuffling goes through c.memcpy
    `[]: size_t cap 1` as a one-slot out-parameter works but is easy to misuse

L1 is a thin lowering to C and is not supposed to have these. Recorded so nobody
re-derives them, not as complaints.

5.3. The two worth L2's attention

    PARALLEL GROWABLE ARRAYS. Growing one array and bumping a shared capacity
      before growing the other leaves the second null, because the next call
      takes the count < cap early-out. Nothing detects it.

    ALIASED POINTERS WITH SINGLE OWNERSHIP. The reverse index holds pointers
      that also live in the exception list. Correct behaviour depends on freeing
      exactly one of them, and nothing expresses which.

These two are different in kind from 5.1 and 5.2: the language offers nothing at
all, and the programmer simply must not make a mistake. That is the shape of
thing a higher level exists to remove - but it is EVIDENCE for the L2 design
discussion, not a requirement already granted.

One more, not about the language: appending to a .ps1 through a PowerShell
here-string injected a U+FEFF mid-file. Twice today, from two different agents,
so it is not one person's slip. Cause not established. Prefer anchored patches,
and check the diff for U+FEFF after writing a .ps1.
