Mixa Manager - the process seam
Third seam. Display, files, processes: three boundaries, three small surfaces.


1. Why a third seam rather than a corner of an existing one

BACKEND_SEAM is pixels out and events in. FILE_SEAM is names and bytes. Running
a program is neither: it is a child with its own lifetime, two streams and an
exit status, and it fails in ways neither of the others has - a command that does
not exist, one that never terminates, one that waits on input nobody will send.

Folding it into either would make both harder to port and would force a headless
display backend to know about processes.


2. What it is for, exactly

The first user of this is deliberately small, from the language owner:

    the console holds text. Pressing Enter takes the line from its start up to
    the CURSOR, sends it plus a newline to the OS, and the child's output
    arrives at the same place - as if the cursor itself were writing. All of it
    lands in the file.

That is ClearShell's "Run OS Command" and it is mode 0.1.2 from the old model -
delegation, not terminal hosting. There is no PTY, no terminal emulation and no
child screen. The child gets a command and a place to write.

Which settles a design question before it is asked: THE CONSOLE IS NOT A
TERMINAL. It is a text file being edited, into which a child's output is
appended. Everything a terminal implies - cursor addressing, colour escapes,
alternate screens - is out of scope until mode 0.1.1, and this seam is not the
place it will arrive.


3. Operations

    spawn      a command line, a working directory. Returns a handle, or
               reports that it could not start - which is DIFFERENT from a
               command that started and failed, and callers need to tell them
               apart

    read       drain available output into a caller's buffer. NEVER BLOCKS,
               for the same reason poll does not: the loop belongs to the
               Message, and a read that waits puts the wait inside a source
               that cannot see the Message's other work

    write      send bytes to the child's input

    status     running, or exited with a code

    kill       terminate it, and mean it - the child and its children

    close      release the handle

Six again, and not by imitation: the same lifetime shape produces the same
count. If a seventh is needed it will be because something here cannot be
expressed, and that is evidence rather than an inconvenience.


4. Rules taken from ClearShell, which has run this for years

Read out of its ProcessBuilder use rather than invented:

    STDERR IS MERGED INTO STDOUT, in arrival order. Splitting them reorders
      them, and for reading a build log the order IS the information.

    STDIN IS CLOSED unless the caller means to write. ClearShell closes it
      explicitly, with the comment that otherwise a command like `cat` waits
      forever for input nobody will send. That is a real hang, not a theoretical
      one.

    THE CHILD RUNS IN A PROCESS GROUP where the platform supports it, so that
      kill reaches its descendants. A shell that spawns a compiler must not
      leave the compiler running.

    THE WORKING DIRECTORY IS EXPLICIT, and the command may change it. ClearShell
      recovers the new one by having the script print it after the command,
      alongside the exit status.

4.1. The marker line

The child's exit status and final directory come back IN BAND, printed after the
command as a marker line carrying both, tab separated - ClearShell's approach,
and we keep it.

In band looks like a hack and is not. The console's scrollback is an ordinary
file that the user can open, search and copy; a sidecar index of command
boundaries would have to be kept in step with it, and would be wrong the moment
someone edited the file. A marker line travels with the text it describes.

It follows that the marker must be unguessable enough not to occur in real
output - ClearShell derives one per command from a counter and a high-resolution
time - and that a caller which finds no marker must treat the command as having
produced no status rather than inventing one.


5. What this seam does NOT do

No PTY, no ConPTY, no terminal emulation, no job control, no shell parsing - the
command line goes to the platform's shell as one string, and what that shell
does with it is the shell's business.

No output limits. ClearShell keeps head, line and tail limits and drops the
middle of noisy output because it holds the text in memory. Ours goes to a file,
so there is nothing to drop; see FILE_SEAM section 2.


6. Background jobs become MESSAGES, and ClearShell already has the right shape

Mandatory application architecture, reconfirmed2026-09-10: concurrent work and
cross-thread coordination use Message, not private synchronization inside C
fragments. Each live Message owns its arena and executes its turns serially;
different Messages may run concurrently. C/OS adapters are isolated boundaries,
not owners of a parallel shared-mutable application model.

No application mutexes, atomics, shared cancellation flags or custom synchronized
queues hidden in C headers/adapters. The Message runtime/host boundary owns
cross-thread delivery; app adapters use that boundary instead of recreating it.
Ordinary calls within one Message remain ordinary calls. They must not smuggle
another worker's mutable state into the caller's arena.

Inventory SYSTEM event sources as well as explicitly started workers: window
and input callbacks, timers, filesystem notifications, process I/O/completion,
and other platform callbacks used by the port. Record each source's execution
context, owning Message, payload lifetime and close/late-event policy. A foreign
callback hands off an owned/copyable event through Message ingress; it does not
mutate the UI graph concurrently. Keep thread-affine OS handles with their owner.
An OS callback is not automatically a new Message or a new native thread.

This is required NOW for the L1 application so the later L2 port preserves the
architecture. A serialized prototype is useful for tests but is not evidence
that concurrent ingress is implemented safely. Missing Message host operations
are explicit integration tasks, not permission to add a temporary C lock scheme.

Instruction from the language owner: shape ClearShell's threads as separate
Messages with inbox and outbox. Worth knowing why that is a first: the
translator - parser, trans, make, finalize, buildCore - is ONE root Message, so
the concurrent half of 19.29.6 has never been exercised by anything. This is the
first place two Messages exist at once, the same way mixa_manager was the first
application code in L1.

6.1. The mapping, and it is NOT one to one

I first wrote "one to one". That is wrong and the language owner said so:
ClearShell has no Messages. What carries over is the RHYTHM - where it posts per
directory, we take a turn per directory. The MECHANISM is entirely different,
and the difference is the whole cost of the port.

    each background job          a Message with its own arena
    runOnUiThread                a send to the UI Message's inbox
    the UI's drain-and-process   the pump, which already exists and is tested

A Java thread SHARES THE HEAP with the UI thread. A Message does not: it has its
own arena and nothing crosses without an explicit copy. So a posted closure and
a sent message are not the same thing wearing different clothes.

6.1.1. What that actually costs, from a real closure

FolderCalculator's post, in FSync.java:

    if (item.adapter.closed)      { sizes().remove(directory); run = false; }
    else if (!isSelect(item))     { sizes().remove(directory); run = false; }
    item.format();
    item.panel.invalidate();

That is not "post a result". It READS UI state to decide whether the job should
continue, WRITES run = false INTO THE BACKGROUND JOB to stop it, mutates a
shared table, and triggers a redraw.

Under the Message model none of it works directly. The job cannot hold a
reference to item - that is another Message's graph. The UI cannot set a flag
inside the job's arena. The shared table cannot be shared.

So the port INVERTS THE CONTROL FLOW: the job sends a RESULT, the UI decides for
itself, and if it wants the job stopped it sends a CANCEL to the job's inbox.
One shared closure becomes two messages travelling in opposite directions.

Which is why the inbox/outbox pair is needed per job in BOTH directions, not
only job to UI.

6.1.2. And it closes the loop on chunking

A job can only notice a cancel BETWEEN CHUNKS. So turn-per-chunk is not only
about not losing progress to a failed turn - it is the only place cancellation
can be observed at all. Two independent reasons for the same structure, which is
usually a sign the structure is right.

Four jobs, from clearshell_reference: FSync (copy, move, overwrite),
FolderCalculator (directory sizes), FileNameFinder (search by name), and command
execution.

6.2. Two rules from the spec that a file manager must not get wrong

19.29.14: a FAILED TURN DISCARDS ITS STAGED OUTBOX. So a long job must publish
per turn rather than accumulate - computing a whole tree in one turn and staging
every result means a failure at the end discards all of them. That is
structural, not a performance choice.

CHECKED, AND CLEARSHELL ALREADY CHUNKS THIS WAY. FolderCalculator posts inside
its loop, one directory at a time, not at the end. So the GRANULARITY carries
over and we do not have to invent it - but only the granularity, see 6.1. The answer was in the source and
I derived it from the spec instead - the same answer, but PORT_OF_CLEARSHELL
section 4 says to look at the source first for a reason.

19.29.14 again: "Outbox rollback does not roll back previously published
own-field or explicit graph mutations." A FAILED COPY LEAVES FILES COPIED - they
cannot be uncopied - so the protocol must report WHAT WAS DONE rather than
present the operation as all or nothing. For a manager that is not a detail:
"the copy failed" without "900 of 1000 arrived" is the difference between a
recoverable situation and a mess.

6.3. Message shape, already decided elsewhere

19.31.4: "the semantic result/failure is an ordinary LMX Message with
correlation equal to the request id". So request/reply correlation is settled
and does not need inventing.

6.4. Selected first transport slice

Lingvamyxa_spec19.29.7.1 defines the initial number/exact-byte-copy participant
slice. It is not awaiting selection. General graph operations remain separately
deferred under19.29.7.2. Each live Message owns one arena; cross-Message work
does not share mutable UI objects. Section7 distinguishes the prototype API
from its still-pending integration into this application.


7. Current Message contract and application integration

Follow the CURRENT Lingvamyxa_spec19.29.7.1/19.29.7.2 and19.31.4, not the
superseded initial ticket191200. A prototype header DOES exist:
stg/l1_baseline/l2src/lmx_message.h. It exposes lmx_msg_create/send/stop,
poll/drive and other participant operations. It is a serialized in-process
number/bytes prototype, not proof that this app uses it or that the full L2
pipeline is self-hosted. Do not make the app build depend on the mutable core
checkout without a reviewed, versioned integration seam. Existing ordinary calls
describe the current single-owner stage only. New concurrent jobs must use the
Message boundary in section6; do not postpone it until after the L2 rewrite.

7.1. Conceptual operations (not literal source syntax or exact C prototypes)

    addr = create(worker_handler, initial_copy)
    send(addr, envelope{ id, correlation, replyTo, payload })
    stop(destination)

7.2. The timing rules, which are not obvious

    a child DOES NOT RUN before the parent's turn publishes successfully
    a failed parent turn RELEASES the unactivated child
    sending to a just-created child in the SAME turn is allowed - FIFO with
      activation
    normal parent close requests its children close at the parent's end_turn;
      each child exits normally at its own end_turn
    after abrupt parent death, child-to-parent liveness checks trigger child
      self-close after the configured policy; no permanently orphaned workers
    an unresponsive child unable to reach end_turn requires the exceptional
      host/supervisor failure path, not a claim of completed safe cleanup

Automatic polling is CHILD TO PARENT, at end_turn or a host-timer cadence.
A live idle parent is not a failed parent. This does not restrict ordinary
messages in either direction. Do not add a mandatory parent-to-child poll.
Prototype lmx_msg_poll/drive needs a host-driven clock/loop; there is no
automatic timer or one-native-thread-per-Message guarantee in that prototype.

7.3. Staging, admission, execution are three different moments

    send() STAGES a copy
    admission is FIFO at the receiver
    execution is a LATER SERIAL TURN of the receiver

A reply or failure is an ordinary Message with correlation equal to the request
id (19.31.4).

Completion means the assigned operation finished: a copy worker completed the
file copy, a delivery worker completed delivery. Admission is not completion,
and a liveness response is not completion. Failure/cancellation remain distinct.
The parent tracks correlated results rather than polling until 'completed'.

7.4. YIELD IS NOT PUBLICATION - this corrects what I assumed

"Yield (21.10) is a dirty-only checkpoint, not outbox publication. Stage-then-
yield in one turn is not committed."

So progress needs MANY SMALL SUCCESSFUL TURNS plus explicit job state. Yield
does not substitute for a turn boundary. I had reached "many turns" from the
failure rules and from ClearShell's chunking; this says why yield is not the
alternative.

7.5. Failure and cancellation

    an uncaught failed turn discards the uncommitted outbox
    already-performed external effects STAY - files copied remain copied
    report partial state on a LATER SUCCESSFUL REPORTING TURN, if the I/O
      failure was caught
    stop() is explicit; late replies after a stop are rejected at admission
    do not resume an assert-terminated Message
    transport resend is not semantic replay is not local retry - three
      different things

7.6. Duplicates

A stable request id, and a RETRIED CREATE MUST NOT SPAWN A SECOND CHILD. Worth
naming because a retry that quietly starts a second copy operation is the kind
of bug a file manager cannot survive.

7.7. Deferred, so do not design around them

graph-copy, adoption, join, live-graph activation, wire serialization,
multi-owner atomic split/link, durable exactly-once.
