Mixa Manager - the UI model
Where the resemblance to Norton and FAR ends.

Visual reference confirmed by the owner, 2026-09-10
-------------------------------------------------
The supplied Android screenshot Screenshot_20260909-151047.png illustrates
the ClearShell appearance to preserve: its colour families, translucent fills,
and the distinction between application buttons and each list's own buttons.
Use the checked-in source for colour/alpha values, not pixels sampled from a
screenshot already composited over a camera image. This is a visual reference,
not a request to reproduce Android system bars, camera integration or dimensions.

The desktop deltas remain exactly those in sections1/1.1: the top APPLICATION
button panel moves to the bottom of layer2; each list-window has its own vertical
scrollbar; one horizontal scrollbar moves the entire row of list-windows.
This shared list-row scroll is not the button panel's own overflow scroll (5.7).
Per-list button headers retain their separate role; not all buttons move down.

Layer1 carries the text/input surface UNDER layer2, in the depth position
occupied by the camera background in the Android reference. It is not an input
strip beside the lists on the same layer. The overlay neither reserves console
rows nor reduces its height. Existing first-version cursor/scrollback rules
remain unchanged. These are confirmations, not a new layout design.


1. Lists, and there are not two of them

The console and the upper layer are where the Norton/FAR likeness stops.

    ANY NUMBER of lists, running horizontally one after another. Not two
      panels. Two is a special case of the model, not the model.
    each list scrolls UP AND DOWN on its own, with its OWN vertical scrollbar
    the whole row scrolls LEFT AND RIGHT together, with ONE shared horizontal
      scrollbar for the set

1.0.2. The cursor belongs to the LOWER layer only

Two things that are easy to conflate, because both mark "where you are" and both
are drawn as cell attributes:

    CURSOR      the text caret. LOWER layer only - the console, at its command
                input line. The lower layer is a full text surface and this is
                what a text surface has.

    HIGHLIGHT   the current element in a list, a button, a panel. UPPER layer.
                Keyboard interfaces always have a current element; see
                PORT_OF_CLEARSHELL 2.8, where this had to be invented because a
                touch interface has no such notion. It is drawn as a double-line box
                FRAME over the element, monochrome, leaving the element's own
                background intact - DRAWING.txt 5.4.

    POINTER     the mouse. UPPER layer, one cell, EIGHT arrows chosen by the
                angle of the last displacement, so it spins as the mouse turns.
                A different thing from the CURSOR above and not a
                counter-example to the rule below - see section 6.

THERE IS NO CURSOR IN THE UPPER LAYER. Not "not yet" - it is not wanted. Panels
are navigated by moving the highlight, not by placing a caret, and adding one
would give the user two competing indications of where they are.

Neither needs anything new from the drawer: both are attribute changes on cells
the drawer already writes, so it never learns about either. A blinking cursor is
a timer in the turn loop, not a drawing capability.

1.0.3. The old model's composition order is APPROXIMATE here

I first recorded this as a deliberate divergence from the old document. That
overstated both the old document's precision and our departure from it, and the
language owner corrected me.

Old_Mixa_Manager_Qt_model.txt section 1 lists:

    1. background
    2. text cell backgrounds
    3. glyphs / text
    4. transparent raster/vector overlay
    5. optional cursor / selection / UI decorations

Read literally, the cursor belongs to no layer and is drawn above everything. It
is not meant that precisely. The intended reading:

    layer 1 IS THE CONSOLE - a real text window, and that is where the cursor
      blinks. It is a text surface; a caret is what a text surface has.
    steps 2 and 3 describe drawing a text surface generally, and apply to the
      OVERLAY's own text as much as to the console's.
    the cursor at step 5 is a loose placement in a sketch, not an assignment.

So the cursor being in the lower layer is a CLARIFICATION of an approximate
passage, not a decision against it.

The stronger reason it belongs there: the lower layer may HOST ANOTHER
APPLICATION - mode 0.1.1, a child terminal through PTY or ConPTY. A hosted vim
or FAR draws its own cursor, and it draws it into that surface. So the console
needs a cursor regardless of our command line, and there is nowhere else it
could go.

The upper layer needs no cursor by default, and certainly not in the first
version. Panels are navigated by moving the highlight.

Selection and UI decorations also sit at step 5 and are NOT settled here. They
remain open.

1.1. Two KINDS of button panel, not two positions

An earlier version of this section said "a button panel at the top and another
at the bottom". That was wrong: the two panels differ in KIND, not in where
they happen to sit. ClearShell has one panel belonging to the LIST and one
belonging to the APPLICATION, and the distinction is what decides where each
goes.

    the APPLICATION panel LIES AT THE BOTTOM of the upper layer. In ClearShell
      it is at the top; here it moves down, because the bottom is where a
      Norton-style command line already lives and the application's buttons
      belong beside it.

    a LIST panel belongs to its list and is drawn as that list's HEADER. There
      is one per list, so N lists have N of them.

The header is STICKY: scrolling the list up and down does not carry it away.
Confirmed2026-09-10: neither application nor per-list button panels leave their
vertical anchor when list contents scroll. EVERY button panel has its OWN
horizontal scroll position, including each list's header. Scrolling one panel's
buttons does not scroll another panel or the shared row of list-windows.
That is already true in ClearShell and it is kept deliberately - a list whose
own buttons scroll out of reach is a list you have to scroll back to before you
can act on it.

The two layers do not share a layout. The LOWER layer is a FULL TEXT SCREEN,
edge to edge: the console owns every cell of it, including the cells beneath the
panel, and the cursor may travel under the panel like anywhere else. The UPPER
layer is the UI system, floating over that screen semi-transparently - the
application panel at the bottom, the lists, each with its own header.

That is a correction, and the thing it corrects is worth naming because it is
the sort of mistake that quietly shapes code. An earlier revision said the
application panel is glued to the bottom "BELOW the console input line", and
listed the screen bottom-upward as panel, then input line, then output. That
describes one layout in stacked bands, which is what a single-layer terminal
would have to do. We have two layers and there is nothing to stack: the panel
does not reserve rows, does not push the console up, and does not shorten it.

The consequences are all simplifications:

    console geometry is the whole screen. A resize does not subtract panel rows
      from it, and there is no arithmetic tying one layer's height to the other.
    text under the panel stays readable - that is what the translucency is FOR,
      and it stops being decoration once something is actually underneath it.
    nothing reflows when the panel changes. Adding a button, or hiding the panel
      entirely, does not move a single console cell.
    hit-testing is by layer and not by region: the upper layer gets the event
      first wherever it has something at that cell, and the console gets it
      otherwise.

ClearShell moves the whole panel vertically instead of scrolling a list inside
its own frame. That is a concession to a narrow phone screen, and it is
explicitly NOT what we do: here a list scrolls within its own bounds and keeps
its own position, so the other lists do not move when one of them does.

Lists are the universal element. Panels are lists, menus are lists. There is no
second mechanism for "a menu" - if it looks like a menu it is a list drawn in
the upper layer.

1.0. The row of lists IS THE PATH

This is the navigation model, and it explains why there is any number of lists
rather than two. Read out of ClearShell's StorageList rather than designed:

    dirs        the chain of directories from the disk root to the current one
    positions   for each level, the index of the entry the user descended
                THROUGH

So list i shows directory i, and its cursor already sits on the child that list
i+1 is showing. The number of lists is the depth of the path.

Going up pops the rightmost list and RESTORES the remembered cursor position in
the one that becomes last - StorageList around line 185. Descending pushes a
list. Scrolling the row left is therefore not a separate navigation mechanism;
it is looking at where you already are.

1.0.1. Each list BEGINS with its ancestor chain, in a different colour

There is no ".." entry - but do not conclude from that, as I first did, that the
parent concept is absent. It is present and richer than "..". I searched for the
literal string, did not find it, and concluded the mechanism did not exist. The
string is absent; the mechanism is not.

Every list opens with a block of ANCESTOR ROWS before its own contents, drawn in
a different colour from ordinary entries. From ClearShell: a row is an ancestor
row when its index is below dirsSize(), and row i shows dirs[i], where dirs is
[null, disk root, ..., immediate parent].

So, top of a list downward - confirmed against a screenshot of the running app,
not only from the source:

    *** LIST OF ROOTS ***      the null entry, no row number
    <parent> 0                 the disk root
    <parent> Music             descending the tree
    <parent> Download          THE CURRENT DIRECTORY ITSELF
    <dir> ...                  subdirectories
    <dir> ...
    file ...                   files last
    file ...

Two corrections to what I first wrote, both from the screenshot.

The last ancestor row is THE CURRENT DIRECTORY, not its parent. The code agrees:
dirs.get(dirs.size() - 1) is used elsewhere as the current path. So the block is
the full path INCLUDING where you are, which is why the owner describes it as
running "up to the native one".

And the ordering below the ancestors is DIRECTORIES THEN FILES, not a single
mixed list.

Row anatomy, also from the screenshot:

    a number in the left gutter, continuous across ancestors, directories and
      files, starting at 1 on the first ancestor - the roots row has none
    a kind tag drawn as literal text: <parent>, <dir>, or a type glyph for a
      file
    the name, then the metadata - date for a directory, size and date for a
      file
    a "..." button at the right edge of every row, opening that row's own menu

Ancestors, directories and files are each drawn in their own colour band.

So the parent is reachable in TWO ways, and that is the point: as the list to
the LEFT, already scrolled to the entry you came through, and as a row at the
top of THIS list. Norton's ".." offers one entry; this offers the whole path,
addressable at any depth, from inside any list.

Verified by reading initParent, the up operation, getView's isParent test and
StorageList's dirs indexing. That descending pushes a list is the obvious
complement and was not separately traced. The gradient that once shaded ancestor
rows by depth is present but COMMENTED OUT in ClearShell - do not port it as
live behaviour without asking.


2. Take the layout method from ClearShell, not just its numbers

ClearShell computes its geometry correctly on any screen from a tablet to an
mp3 player, and the reason is worth stating because it is the same rule this
project already adopted for rendering.

ClearShell.java, init(), around line 697:

    button.setTextAppearance(...); button.setText("Hello world!");
    button.measure(...);
    hb = button.getMeasuredHeight() + (hb >> 2);   button height
    wb = (hb << 1) - (hb >> 2);                    width = 1.75 * hb
    margin = hb >> 5;                              margin = hb / 32
    max = longer + (longer >> 1);                  1.5 * the longer side
    listW = shorter - hb;

Note what is absent: any pixel constant, and any fraction. ONE quantity is
MEASURED - the height of real text in the real font - and everything else is
derived from it by integer shifts. That is exactly
Mixa_Manager_RENDERING_DOCTRINE.txt: compute from something real, arrive at
integers, never scale.

So ClearShell's layout is not a thing to copy numerically; it is an existing
instance of the doctrine, and the translation to our case is direct. Our
measured unit is already there by construction: THE CELL. Button heights,
margins, scrollbar widths and list widths are integer multiples of a cell, and
nothing in the interface is expressed in pixels.

Where a concrete proportion is wanted rather than derived, ClearShell's are
sound and there is no reason to invent others: a button 1.75 times its height
wide, a margin at a thirty-second of it.


3. Colours, and what they confirm

From ClearShell.java, used directly:

    argb(240, 32, 32, 0)     c0 text colour - nearly opaque
    argb(96, 255, 255, 192)  b0 background - clearly translucent
    argb(96, 255, 192, 0), argb(96, 128, 255, 128), argb(96, 64, 255, 255)
                             further translucent accents
    0xFFFFFF40               cSel selected foreground, fully opaque
    0xFF000060               bSel selected background, fully opaque

Two things follow.

Alpha varies BY ELEMENT: ordinary b* fills use 96, bPleaseWait uses 64, and
bSel uses 255. The c* text colours generally use 240, not panel bodies. This is
evidence for putting alpha on the CELL rather than on the surface - a per-surface
constant could not express a translucent panel carrying an opaque selected row.

The owner CONFIRMED on2026-09-10: glyphs are fully opaque (alpha255); only
backgrounds may be translucent, as DRAWING.txt requires. Preserve source text
RGB but use alpha255 instead of ordinary ClearShell text alpha240. The source
pairs in5.4 are reference values, not an instruction to make letters translucent.
Background colours and their individual opacity are preserved, not made uniform.


4. What is deliberately not decided here

This section does not enumerate scrollbar styling, keys or panel/list content.
Consult the later sections and PORT_OF_CLEARSHELL for the recorded decisions
and reference behaviour; omission here is not permission to redesign. The shape is: any
number of lists, independent vertical scrolling, one shared horizontal scroll,
two button panels, everything sized in cells.


5. Buttons: the values, taken from ClearShell rather than invented

All from ClearShell.java. Ported, not designed - see PORT_OF_CLEARSHELL section
2.0: the presentation is ported in full.

5.1. No borders. A micro-gap instead.

Buttons carry NO frame. They are separated by the margin alone - hb >> 5, about
a pixel. See DRAWING.txt section 5 for the nine tiles that produce this.

5.2. Width depends on the LABEL, which is real logic and not a detail

    normalize(text):
        length < 4   ->  width = hb, a square button
                         UNLESS the label contains "<" or ">"
        length < 3   ->  the label is additionally enlarged
        otherwise    ->  width = wb - (wb >> 2), three quarters of wb

So "F1" is a square button and "Find filename" is a wide one, and that follows
from the label rather than from a table someone maintains.

5.3. Placement

From freshLayout(): explicit lines, not auto-wrap. Within a line
x += width + margin; between lines y += height + margin; a null entry is a
SEPARATOR advancing x by hb >> 1. Panel height and width come from the maxima,
and the panel sits inside a horizontal scroll - so buttons that do not fit
SCROLL rather than shrinking or re-wrapping.

5.4. Colours, as pairs

Every button is a (text, background) pair, and the pattern is uniform: text
nearly opaque at alpha 240 and dark, background translucent at alpha 96 and
light.

    Green    240,0,16,0      /  96,128,255,128
    Green1   240,0,16,16     /  96,64,255,192
    Blue     240,0,0,96      /  96,0,192,255
    Cyan     240,0,0,96      /  96,64,255,255
    Rose     = cBlue         /  96,255,192,255
    Red      240,32,0,0      /  96,255,128,128
    Red1     240,0,0,32      /  96,255,192,192
    Magenta  240,32,0,32     /  96,255,128,255
    Brown    240,16,16,0     /  96,192,192,96
    Yellow   240,16,16,0     /  96,255,192,128
    Yellow1  = cGreen        /  96,255,255,192
    Orange   240,48,24,0     /  96,255,192,0
    Gray     240,0,0,0       /  96,128,128,128
    Light    240,32,32,32    /  96,192,192,192
    Black    240,255,255,255 /  96,0,0,0
    Selected 0xFFFFFF40      /  0xFF000060   - fully opaque, the odd one out

Off, Error and Text are aliases of Gray, Red and Gray. Selected being opaque
where everything else is translucent is worth preserving rather than
regularising: it is what makes a selection read as selected.

5.5. Where the panel sits

The application panel was at the TOP in ClearShell and lies at the BOTTOM here.
So F1, its first button, lands BOTTOM LEFT.

It lies there on the UPPER layer - see 1.1. It is not a band at the bottom of
one screen: the console's text screen runs full height underneath it, and the
cursor can pass beneath the panel.

5.6. The eight characters are the BORDER, not the width

Mikhail, 2026-09-10: the application panel sits at the bottom, "8 characters
with a micro-gap and the button fill".

The eight are the pseudographic BORDER of the button - the nine-slice minus its
centre. Four corners and four sides, drawn as cells; the ninth is the fill named
in the same sentence, and the micro-gap of 5.1 is what stands in for a border
line. That is exactly what mixa_tiles.h already provides at U+E000..U+E00F:
FILL, N, S, W, E, NW, NE, SW, SE.

So nothing about WIDTH changes. ClearShell's values stand as section 2 has them:

    wide button      (hb << 1) - (hb >> 2)      1.75 * hb
    square button    hb, for a label under four characters
    micro-gap        cell_h >> 5, floored at 1 pixel
    fill             the button's own translucent background

An earlier revision of this section read the eight as a WIDTH IN CELLS and
replaced the 1.75 rule with a constant. That was wrong, and it was wrong in an
instructive way: the derivation I built on top of it - that 1.75 * hb has no
whole-cell solution at eight, so the proportion had to give way - was sound
arithmetic resting on a misread sentence, and sound reasoning downstream of a
bad premise is the hardest kind to catch from the inside. The sentence never
mentioned width; it listed the three things a button is DRAWN from. Committed as
a696d0c, corrected here.


5.7. The panel scrolls HORIZONTALLY, and the highlight is what scrolls it

Mikhail, 2026-09-10: "the button panel scrolls horizontally. On Android that is
easy, here it will have to be scrolled jointly with moving the highlight."

5.3 already had the mechanism - buttons that do not fit SCROLL, they do not
shrink and do not re-wrap. What was missing is what DRIVES the scroll, and it is
not the same thing on the two platforms.

    ClearShell   a touch gesture. Independent of anything else, because there is
                 no highlight to be independent OF - a finger lands directly on
                 the button it wants, and the scroll exists only to bring that
                 button under the finger.

    here         moving the HIGHLIGHT. Panels are navigated by moving it (1.0),
                 so a keyboard has no separate "scroll the panel" action and
                 should not grow one. The highlight moves to the next button;
                 if that button is past the visible edge, the panel scrolls to
                 bring it in. One action, not two.

So the panel never scrolls by itself. Its horizontal position is a FUNCTION of
where the highlight is, and the only input that changes it is the same keystroke
that moves the highlight.

5.7.1. What happens when the mouse scrolls it instead

We do have mouse events in the seam, so the view can be moved without the
highlight moving. The rule, and this is my call rather than something read out
of ClearShell - there is nothing to read, the original has no highlight:

    the VIEW may leave the highlight. A mouse scroll moves the view alone, and
      the highlight is allowed to go off-screen. Forcing it to follow would mean
      the mouse silently changing what Enter acts on.

    any HIGHLIGHT movement brings the view back, so that the highlight is
      visible again before it moves. Keyboard navigation is therefore always
      coherent: you never move a highlight you cannot see.

That asymmetry is the ordinary behaviour of every keyboard-and-mouse list, and
it is worth stating because the symmetric version - view always follows
highlight - looks tidier and is wrong: it makes a scroll gesture jump the view
back the instant you release it.

5.7.2. The same rule, in three places

This is one rule and it applies wherever there is a highlight and a viewport:

    EACH button panel     horizontally, in its OWN independent viewport
    a single list         vertically, in its own bounds and its own scrollbar
    the ROW of lists      horizontally, on the one shared scrollbar - moving the
                          highlight into a list that is off to the side scrolls
                          the row to bring that list into view

The third is the one with a wrinkle: a highlight move can require scrolling TWO
viewports at once - the row horizontally to reach the list, and that list
vertically to reach the element. Both follow from the same rule, but they are
separate scrolls and the order they are applied in is visible to the user.
Not settled here; noted so it is not discovered late.


6. The mouse pointer: one cell, eight arrows, and it spins

Mikhail, 2026-09-10: "let us make the mouse FUNNY - let it spin, by a simple
algorithm. Divide the circle into 8, compute the angle of the last displacement
(at low precision) and pick one of the 8."

    U+2B06  UPWARDS BLACK ARROW           up
    U+2B08  NORTH EAST BLACK ARROW        up-right
    U+2B95  RIGHTWARDS BLACK ARROW        right
    U+2B0A  SOUTH EAST BLACK ARROW        down-right
    U+2B07  DOWNWARDS BLACK ARROW         down
    U+2B0B  SOUTH WEST BLACK ARROW        down-left
    U+2B05  LEFTWARDS BLACK ARROW         left
    U+2B09  NORTH WEST BLACK ARROW        up-left

The arrow points WHERE THE MOUSE IS GOING, not back at its own hotspot the way a
desktop pointer does. That follows from choosing the picture by direction of
travel rather than being a separate decision.

Still no animation. The pointer jumps between the eight; it does not ease
between them. "Smooth I dislike on purely logical grounds."

6.0. The angle, at low precision, with no trigonometry

An octant boundary sits at 22.5 degrees, where |dy| = tan(22.5) * |dx| and
tan(22.5) = sqrt(2) - 1 = 0.41421. Approximate it as 5/12 = 0.41667 and the
boundary lands at 22.62 degrees - 0.12 off, which is far inside "low precision"
and costs two multiplications:

    horizontal sector   12 * |dy| < 5 * |dx|      ->  left or right by sign of dx
    vertical sector     12 * |dx| < 5 * |dy|      ->  up or down by sign of dy
    otherwise           a diagonal, by both signs

No atan2, no floating point, no table, and the eight sectors come out equal to
within a fifth of a degree - which matters here, because unequal sectors would
make the spin stutter at four points of the circle and the spin is the feature.

A displacement of zero changes nothing: the pointer keeps the arrow it had.

6.0.1. What replaced what, and why the old shape could not grow

An earlier revision had FOUR arrows chosen by two latched per-axis signs - last
non-zero dx sign, last non-zero dy sign. The latch existed because with only
four diagonal pictures there was no way to draw "moving purely sideways", so
each axis had to keep its last answer and pretend.

With eight there is a picture for every direction, so the latch is gone: the
angle of the last non-zero displacement is the whole state. One value instead of
two, and no pretending.

6.0.2. The artefact this will have, stated in advance

Mouse events arrive in HALF-CELLS (section 7), which is a coarse unit. A slow
diagonal drag therefore arrives as (1,0) then (0,1) then (1,0), and the arrow
will flip between right and down rather than settling on down-right.

Kept, not fixed. It is honest to the input we actually get, the alternative is
accumulating displacement over a time window - which is state, tuning, and the
first step towards the smoothing that was explicitly not wanted - and a pointer
that twitches while you drag it slowly is arguably the funny part. Recorded so
that when it shows up it is recognised as this decision rather than reported as
a bug.

6.1. Why this is not a contradiction of "no cursor in the upper layer"

Section 0 says the upper layer has no cursor and that this is wanted, not
pending. It stays true. A CURSOR is a text caret: it marks an insertion point in
a text surface, it belongs to whatever is being edited, and the upper layer
edits nothing. A POINTER marks where a physical device is aimed and belongs to
no surface at all. They are different objects that happen to share the English
word "cursor", and the upper layer has the second, not the first.

6.2. It costs nothing new, and that is worth checking rather than asserting

    the codepoints are ORDINARY Unicode, so they take the normal glyph path
      through mixa_backend_glyph. No tile family, unlike the highlight border.
    mouse events already arrive in CELLS - the backend converts once from pixels
      and consumers never see pixels (mixa_backend.h, MixaEvent row/col). So a
      cell-quantised pointer is what the seam was already delivering.
    "one cell" is the doctrine, not a simplification: compute fractionally,
      then snap to integer positions. A pointer that moved in pixels over a grid
      that moves in cells would be the one thing in the interface not on the
      grid.

State is one octant and a cell, both in the application. The octant is
recomputed from each non-zero displacement and needs no history; a zero
displacement leaves it alone.

6.3. Decided rather than read

    START DIRECTION. Before the first move there is no travel and so no answer.
      South-east (U+2B0A), arbitrarily but not randomly: it is the direction of
      travel from a pointer parked at the top left, which is where one starts.
    COLOUR. The cell's fg, fully opaque, white by default - foreground elements
      here never vary alpha (section 3). "BLACK ARROW" is only the Unicode name
      of the shape; the colour is ours.
    CONTRAST, and this one is genuinely open. A solid white arrow over a light
      panel is invisible, and these glyphs are filled shapes with no outline. A
      desktop pointer solves it with a black keyline. Left unsolved rather than
      guessed - it needs to be looked at once something is on screen, which is
      exactly what "let us see how it looks" is for.
    MISSING GLYPH, and one of the eight is a known risk. The seam reports a
      codepoint the platform cannot render (MixaGlyph.missing) rather than
      substituting, so the pointer must not silently vanish - fall back to
      something present and say so. Not designed here; noted so it is not
      discovered as a blank screen.

      The one to check first is U+2B95, rightwards. Its three siblings - left,
      up and down at U+2B05..U+2B07 - are long-established, while the rightwards
      arrow was added to Unicode later to fill that exact gap, so it is the one
      most likely to be absent from a given system font. A hole at precisely one
      of the eight would read as a bug in the spin rather than as a missing
      glyph, which is why it is worth testing for by name on each platform
      rather than testing "the arrows" as a set.


7. The three grids: text, UI, and the mouse's half step

Mikhail, 2026-09-10, four points:

    1  keep the ABILITY to run a different font on each layer
    2  for now use ONE font on both
    3  make the upper layer one character SHORTER in height and width, and
       start drawing it half a character down and right
    4  add a third VIRTUAL cellular layer for the mouse alone, step exactly
       1/2 - not a third screen, only its coordinates - and choose a font for
       it by the same algorithm, the same size or slightly larger, its glyphs
       placed strictly on the half step. A larger pointer glyph is fine.

    "So that the document text and the UI do not quite coincide."

That last line is the reason and it is worth keeping in front of the other four.
The point is NOT alignment. It is deliberate MISalignment: two grids that nearly
match are read as one grid drawn badly, while two grids offset by half a cell
are read as two things. 10.3 of BACKEND_SEAM had already accepted that the
grids do not generally align when the fonts differ; this makes the offset
deliberate and constant instead of a by-product of font sizes.

7.1. The geometry

Let the text cell be cw by ch, and the screen cols by rows.

    LOWER   the text screen. cols x rows, origin at 0,0. Unchanged - it is the
            full screen and everything else is measured against it.

    UPPER   the UI. (cols-1) x (rows-1) cells, origin at +cw/2, +ch/2.

            Shrinking by one is what makes the offset fit: pushed half a cell
            right and down, a full-width grid would hang half a cell off the
            far edge. One cell narrower leaves half a cell of margin on each
            side, so the UI floats centred inside the text screen with an even
            border of half a cell all round.

    MOUSE   a coordinate lattice, not a surface. Step cw/2 by ch/2, so
            (2*cols) x (2*rows) positions over the same area.

7.2. Why the half step is the natural one

It is the finest step at which BOTH grids have well-defined positions. A text
cell is two mouse steps; an upper cell is also two mouse steps, offset by one.
So every mouse position lands either on a shared boundary or exactly at the
centre of one cell and the boundary of the other. There is no third case, and
no rounding anywhere.

That is what makes the pointer twice as precise as the text grid while staying
discrete. Mikhail dislikes smooth motion on logical grounds (section 6); this
gives resolution without giving up the grid.

7.3. What I am deciding, since the description does not say

    ANCHOR. The half step is half of the LOWER cell. With one font on both
      layers this is moot; with two fonts it is not, and the lower layer is the
      right anchor because it is the full screen and always exists, while the
      upper one is inset and derived from it.

    COORDINATE UNIT AT THE SEAM. Mouse events already arrive in CELLS, converted
      once in the backend so consumers cannot drift (mixa_backend.h). They now
      arrive in HALF-CELLS of the lower layer, which keeps that property exactly
      - one conversion, in the one place that knows the geometry.

      Mapping is then arithmetic and needs no floating point:
          text cell   = half >> 1
          upper cell  = (half - 1) >> 1, and half = 0 is outside the upper layer
      A pointer at an odd half-coordinate is at the centre of a text cell and on
      an upper-cell boundary; at an even one, the reverse.

    A THIRD GLYPH LAYER, NOT A THIRD SCREEN. The pointer needs its own font
      size, so the seam grows MIXA_LAYER_POINTER for rasterising and metrics for
      it. It does NOT grow a third cell grid to composite: there is nothing to
      lay out, only one glyph to place.

7.4. The pointer glyph may be bigger than its step, and that is allowed

"If the mouse symbol is larger, that is fine too." Explicitly so. The pointer is
one glyph at a POSITION, not content in a cell, so it has no box to overflow.
The half step governs where it is placed, never how large it is drawn.

Which also means the pointer is the only element in the interface whose size is
not a cell. That is consistent rather than an exception: section 6 established
it belongs to no surface, and something belonging to no surface has no cell.

7.5. The cell is not the font, and it is even

Added by Mikhail once the half step existed: decouple the cell size from the
font size for all the screens; for the first two, fit the cell to the font. If
the system hands us an odd width or height, make the cell one pixel larger so it
is even, and leave the font exactly as the system gave it.

That is what makes 7.2 true rather than approximately true. Half of an odd
number of pixels is not a number of pixels, so an odd cell would put every
second pointer position on a fraction. With an even cell all four positions per
character are exact. BACKEND_SEAM 10.8.

The font stays untouchable and the cell becomes ours - which is the doctrine
finally saying what the cell IS, rather than assuming it equals the font.

7.6. One font, and where the second one would really come from

Mikhail expects one font to stay. If different fonts are ever wanted they
arrive as further VIRTUAL SCREENS laid over the top, not as a second font on an
existing layer - which is the same growth direction the seam already anticipates
for images.

So the per-layer metrics are a mechanism held open rather than a case about to
be exercised. Both points are already true of the seam: MixaCellMetrics carries separate
metrics per layer, mixa_backend_glyph takes a layer, and "a backend with only
one font reports the same metrics twice" is written into the header as a
legitimate answer rather than a failure.

So today upper_cell equals text_cell and the offset of 7.1 is the ONLY thing
distinguishing the two grids. That is the interesting case to look at, because
it is the one where the misalignment is doing all the work by itself.

The pointer font follows 10.3's rule - the available system size NEAREST the
target, used as it comes - with the target being the text size or slightly
above, rather than 1.5x.
